# Questions on Sequence Retrieval

## General Questions
* This may be a simple question but I still have a difficult time understanding the difference between an ortholog, homolog and paralog.

## Indeces
* What does the indexes stand for generally and specifically (ex.IIS, MAX etc.) ?

## Expanding query to k-tuples
* When performing the BLAST algorithm, what does it mean to expand the list of k-tuples to any k-tuples that match with an alignment score > a threshold T? i.e. how is this expansion done in practice.

## BLAST Extending k-tuple alignments
* I do not understand what you mean by extending the matches for each matching sequence in BLAST.
* Is it possible for the dot plot generated by blast to have a slope other than 1?
* In seeding process Blast finds good matches and the program extend matching in both directions comparing the score with a threshold value. what is the significance of this threshold value and how its determined?
* I have a question regarding the dot-plot in the video. What is the black outlier, what does it represent?
* How is the alignment score calculated?

## Significance
* In the video at the end you talk about the E-value. You say that a value of 100 is probably not a good match but a value of 10 to the minus 10 is a very rare event to get a match as good as this one hence you tend to trust those. So, the lower the E-value (or the closer the value is to zero) the more significant the hit is. My question is, is there any range/upper limit for what E-value that can be counted as a good match? And if so, what is the range for a good E-value?
* I did not really understand how the algorithm take noise into consideration, i.e how it distinguish many hits from noise. Is noise only equivalent to it being not a "real match" and covered by the statistical evaluation?
* What e-value would be too high, meaning we should not take the resulting alignment from Blast seriously? Or is it a combination of e-value, identity and score?
* How would you select lambda and K given a certain scoring matrix and database? What properties do you want lambda and K to have?

## St Clair and Visick
* Chapter 4 (p. 66) mentions that a certain 'threshold value' play a role in the BLAST algorithm. Is this threshold, as in the case for the matching, based on the statistical significance and the biological similarity to the aligned query?
* BLAST extends the sequence and compares the resulting score to a threshold value, how is this threshold set, i.e. what is it based on?

## Selection of default parameters
* In chapter 4, it says that the default value for k is 11 for DNA alignments and 3 for protein alignments. How does one know when to select the default values and when to select any other typical value (k=3-6 for proteins and k=6-20 for DNA)?
* In total 12 questions on this....


## Interpreting output
* When using BLAST, which of the returned values (max score, total score, query cover, E-value, max ident) is used to choose the best fitting sequences? And if we use a combination of those, how do we decide which one to prioritize the most?
   > In the book it says that BLAST orders the matching sequences according to the e-value (which has a statistical significance)

* In BLAST, what is the difference between the max score and the total score?
* How do the query coverage and the max ident differ? The book states that the query coverage represents the percentage of the query sequence that is aligned to some part of a match, whereas the max ident gives the percentage of identical nucleotides between the sequences within a region. Does this mean that the query coverage also accounts for mismatches and gaps?
* BLAST gives us information about the quality of the match by using 5 parameters. I have a question about, which one out of five parameters more strongly suggests that two sequences have a good match?
* What's the difference between E-value and Bit score and when should you choose one over the other?

## FASTA
* why do we use the fasta format and don't just write the sequence we want to align?
* In FASTA file one sequence is written over multiple lines. Is this then used as one or multiple sequences?

## Other methods
* Are there competitive methods for BLAST?
* Is both BLAST and CLUSTALW are multiple sequence searching tools, which one is preferred over other and in what circumstances.?
* Regarding BLAST, do we know any other methods that can compare to it? If yes, what are the differences (pros and cons)  between them to compare them and know which you to choose?
* Being BLAST a heuristic method, how often do we not get the best alignment possible?
* Are there similar algorithms for finding global alignments?
* In the video it is said that a common format for storing sequences is Fasta, are there other popular ones and how do they compare?
* When talking about the speed, accuracy and statistical evaluation in the video, which one would you say is the most important of the these 3 conditions? Can one be neglected in order to optimize the others?
* Can you use some other tool similar to BLAST to find the most closed homolog?

## Previous Lecture
* Also, the book describes an efficient way for ClustalW to produce a multiple alignment but that ClustalW may not correctly align sequences that share regions of similarity if the sequences are not very similar overall. How is this problem solved and how do we know if ClustalW has made a correct alignment?
* In multiple alignment, what kind of alignment can be the first doing pairwise alignmnent?
* How do I know how to identify the connection of two sequences and decide how are they related? How can I construct a guide tree?
* You metioned that ClustalW was widely used before but usually not preferred anymore. Since BLAST only shows individual alignments, what is the most commonly used method for multiple sequence alignment now?

## Another lecture
* Why do results of NCBI Translated Blast (tblastn) and Standard Nucleotide Blast (blastn) differ if given the same sequence?
* In BLAST it is possible to do a nucleotide blast, comparing nucleotide sequences, and a protein blast, comparing amino acid sequences. Which of these blasts gives the most useful information and when would you choose one blast over the other? It is also possible to compare nucleotide sequences against a protein database and compare amino acid sequences against a nucleotide database. When is it beneficial to do these kinds of blasts?
* While doing a web blast, there is an option to perform a discontinuous megablast which scans the database for dissimilar sequences. In what instances would one use it? What e-value can we expect?

## I don't parse these questions
* In a BLAST search, will the sensitivity of search and the number of positive hits change if the size of the K changes and how?
* What should one keep in mind when indexing unstructured data to greatly speed up the searches?
* When selecting BLAST algorithm, when would it be useful to select the blastn with default k-tuple value 6 instead of the megablast with k-tuple value 28? When would the shorter alignments you might obtain using blastn be of significance?
